“Serve Jehovah with rejoicing,”
says Psalm 100:2.
Yes, Jehovah wants us to be joyful.
And he’s given us
many reasons to rejoice.
He gave us life with its many joys.
He gave us the Bible
to teach us how to enjoy life.
And he guides us
into countless joyful experiences.
Yes, Jehovah is the God who gives joy.
Satan, however, does not want us
to find joy in serving Jehovah.
Why not?
For one thing,
he knows that joy helps us
to keep on preaching and teaching
—the very work he wants to stop.
So he tries to destroy our joy,
sometimes through official opposition
and at other times
through family and community pressure.
Satan also wants us
to cut back our service to Jehovah
in order to obtain
unnecessary material things.
He wants us to think that getting
more and more material things
will bring us lasting joy.
It won’t.
Satan’s tactics are not new.
As we now read portions of the books
of Ezra, Haggai, and Zechariah,
look for lessons that can help us
to “serve Jehovah with rejoicing” today.
Note what brought
Jehovah’s people joy back then
and what robbed them of their joy.
And consider why and how
we  can experience
“the joy of Jehovah” today,
even under trying circumstances.
Ezra, a priest and a copyist
of the Law of Moses,
is the writer of the book
that bears his name.
The book of Ezra
picks up the history of Israel
from the end of 2 Chronicles,
which likely Ezra also wrote.
It’s 537 B.C.E.,
and many Jews
are about to return to Judah.
The nation has spent 70 years
in captivity to Babylon
for practicing idol worship.
They’ve learned a hard lesson,
and never again does the entire nation
fall back into idolatry.
Now the time has come to get pure worship
back on its feet in Jerusalem.
The account spans the reigns
of several Persian kings,
starting with King Cyrus,
and it has a joyful beginning.
Please open to Ezra 1:1-6, and follow along.
“In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia,
“in order that Jehovah’s word
spoken by Jeremiah would be fulfilled,
“Jehovah stirred the spirit
of King Cyrus of Persia
“to make a proclamation
throughout his kingdom,
which he also put in writing, saying:”
“This is what King Cyrus of Persia says,
“‘Jehovah the God of the heavens
“‘has given me all the kingdoms of the earth,
“‘and he has commissioned me
to build him a house in Jerusalem,
“‘which is in Judah.
“‘Whoever there is
among you of all his people,
“‘may his God be with him,
“‘and let him go up to Jerusalem,
which is in Judah,
“‘and rebuild the house
of Jehovah the God of Israel
“‘—he is the true God—
“‘whose house was in Jerusalem.
“‘Anyone who is residing as a foreigner,
“‘wherever he may be,
“‘let him be helped by his neighbors
“‘by their giving him silver and gold,
“‘goods and livestock,
“‘along with the voluntary offering
for the house of the true God,
which was in Jerusalem.’”
“Then the heads of the paternal houses
of Judah and of Benjamin
“and the priests and the Levites
“—everyone whose spirit
the true God had stirred—
“prepared to go up
and rebuild the house of Jehovah,
“which was in Jerusalem.
“All those around them supported them
“by giving them utensils
of silver and of gold,
“goods, livestock, and valuable things,
besides all the voluntary offerings.”
Just imagine!
Jehovah returns the Jews to their land
with a commission from King Cyrus himself
to rebuild the temple.
Many Jews joyfully take up this assignment.
However, those who
for various reasons cannot return
give financial support to those who can.
Likely in the early spring of 537 B.C.E.,
nearly 50,000 Israelites depart Babylon.
Leading them are high priest Jeshua,
also called Joshua,
and the governor
whom Cyrus appointed,
Zerubbabel.
In the early autumn,
they arrive in Judah,
and they are joyful!
But how can they sustain that joy?
Note what they do
as soon as they get settled.
Let’s read Ezra 3:1-6:
“When the seventh month arrived
and the Israelites were in their cities,
“they gathered together
with one accord in Jerusalem.
“Jeshua the son of Jehozadak
and his fellow priests
“and Zerubbabel
the son of Shealtiel and his brothers
“rose up and built the altar
of the God of Israel,
“so that they could offer up
burnt sacrifices on it,
“as it is written in the Law of Moses
the man of the true God.
“So they set the altar up on its former site,
“despite their fear of the peoples
of the surrounding lands,
“and they began offering up
burnt sacrifices to Jehovah on it,
“the morning
and the evening burnt sacrifices.
“Then they held the Festival of Booths
according to what is written,
“and day by day they offered up
the specified number of burnt sacrifices
“that were required each day.
“Afterward they offered up
the regular burnt offering
“and the offerings for the new moons
“and those for all the sanctified
festival seasons of Jehovah,
“as well as those from everyone
“who willingly offered
a voluntary offering to Jehovah.
“From the first day of the seventh month
“they started to offer up
burnt sacrifices to Jehovah,
“though the foundation of Jehovah’s temple
had not yet been laid.”
Did you notice that the Jews
reinstitute Jehovah’s worship
“despite their fear of the peoples
of the surrounding lands”?
Because of their courageous action,
this is a very joyful time.
It’s just as Moses said
when he instructed the nation
to celebrate the Festival of Booths:
“You will become nothing but joyful”!
The next year, they courageously
and joyfully lay
the foundation for the temple.
Let’s read about that at Ezra 3:10-13:
“When the builders laid the foundation
of the temple of Jehovah,
“then the priests in official clothing,
with the trumpets,
“and the Levites, the sons of Asaph,
with the cymbals,
“stood up to praise Jehovah
“according to the direction
of King David of Israel.
“And they began to sing in response
“by praising and giving thanks to Jehovah,
“‘for he is good; his loyal love
toward Israel endures forever.’
“Then all the people shouted
with a loud shout of praise to Jehovah
“because the foundation
of the house of Jehovah had been laid.
“Many of the priests, the Levites,
and the heads of the paternal houses
“—the old men who had seen the former house—
“wept with a loud voice when they saw
the foundation of this house being laid,
“while many others shouted joyfully
at the top of their voice.
“So the people could not distinguish
“the sound of the joyful shouts
from the sound of the weeping,
“for the people were shouting so loudly
that the sound was heard
from a great distance.”
Yes, some of the oldest members of the nation
cannot imagine
how this temple could possibly match
the glory of Solomon’s temple.
But the others’ joyful shouting
overpowers their weeping.
The people of the surrounding lands, however,
do not rejoice.
Instead, they cunningly target Israel’s joy.
Let’s see how in Ezra chapter 4:1-3:
“When the enemies
of Judah and Benjamin heard
“that the returned exiles were building
a temple to Jehovah the God of Israel,
“they immediately approached Zerubbabel
and the heads of the paternal houses
and said to them:”
“Let us build along with you;
“for like you, we worship your God
“and we have been sacrificing to him
“since the days
of King Esar-haddon of Assyria,
who brought us here.”
“However, Zerubbabel and Jeshua
“and the rest of the heads
of the paternal houses of Israel
said to them:”
“You have no share with us
in building a house to our God,
“for we alone will build it
to Jehovah the God of Israel,
just as King Cyrus
the king of Persia has commanded us.”
Zerubbabel discerns
that behind their enemies’ offer to help
lurk bad motives.
When he rejects their offer,
they try to prevent the Jews
from working on the temple.
Notice how verses 4 to 7 continue:
“Then the people of the land
“were continually discouraging
the people of Judah
“and disheartening them from building.
“They hired advisers against them
to frustrate their plans
“all the days of King Cyrus of Persia
until the reign of King Darius of Persia.
“At the beginning of the reign of Ahasuerus,
“they wrote an accusation
“against the inhabitants
of Judah and Jerusalem.
“And in the days
of King Artaxerxes of Persia,
“Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel,
and the rest of his colleagues
“wrote to Artaxerxes the king;
“they translated the letter into Aramaic,
writing it with Aramaic characters.”
Let’s read what Rehum,
the chief government official,
and others of Israel’s enemies
write to the king.
Consider what kind
of false accusations they make,
as recorded at Ezra 4:11-16:
“This is a copy
of the letter that they sent him.”
“To King Artaxerxes from your servants,
“the men of the region Beyond the River:
“And now let it be known to the king
“that the Jews who came up here
from you to us have arrived at Jerusalem.
“They are rebuilding
the rebellious and wicked city,
“and they are finishing the walls
and repairing the foundations.
“Now let it be known to the king
“that if this city should be rebuilt
and its walls finished,
“they will not give tax, tribute, or toll,
“and it will result in a loss
to the treasuries of the kings.
“Since we eat the salt of the palace
“and it is not proper for us
to see the king’s interests harmed,
“we have therefore sent
to make this known to the king,
“so that there may be an investigation
“of the book of records of your ancestors.
“You will find in the book of records
“and learn that this city
is a rebellious city,
“injurious to kings and provinces,
“and within it have been those
stirring up sedition
“from ancient times.
“That is why this city was destroyed.
“We are making known to the king
“that if this city is rebuilt
and its walls are finished,
you will have no control
of the region Beyond the River.”
Do those false accusations sound familiar?
They are the same ones
our enemies sometimes hurl against us today:
“They don’t pay taxes.
“They work
against the government’s interests.
“They are rebellious and seditious.
They’re uncontrollable.”
All false charges, of course!
And back then, they had their effect.
The king orders the work halted,
and temple rebuilding comes to a standstill.
How sad!
When the Jews first returned,
they didn’t let fear of man
stop them from doing Jehovah’s work.
But now they do.
Many of us today
face increasing opposition to Jehovah’s work.
But compromising or giving up
has never brought anyone joy
—just the opposite.
Remaining faithful brings joy,
even in the face of violent persecution.
But how is that possible?
Consider a true-life example.
Picture a mother and daughter
surrounded by a mob of angry men
demanding that they
buy political party cards.
What would the sisters do?
If they compromised and bought the cards,
their persecutors would rejoice.
But afterward the sisters would be miserable,
knowing they had denied
their heavenly Father.
The sisters did not give in.
Of course, they didn’t enjoy
being ridiculed and mistreated.
Later, however,
their consciences were clean.
And they felt deep joy,
knowing they had remained
faithful to Jehovah.
What about the Jews of Ezra’s day?
Many may have left a stable life in Babylon
to make the arduous trek to Judah.
Now, after about 14 years
of constant opposition,
from the laying
of the temple’s foundation up to the ban,
the Jews have lost
their zeal for Jehovah’s work.
They go through the motions
of offering sacrifices,
but they are not doing
what Jehovah told  them to do
—finish rebuilding the temple!
When they meet resistance,
they rationalize that it must not be
Jehovah’s time to finish the work.
Apparently, even Governor Zerubbabel
and high priest Jeshua need encouragement.
To provide it,
Jehovah sends the prophet Haggai.
Let’s turn now
to the book of Haggai, chapter 1.
Haggai’s clear and powerful messages,
delivered during a period
of about four months,
get right to the heart of the matter,
as we read at Haggai 1:2-11:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘These people say,
“The time has not yet come
for the house of Jehovah to be built.”’
“And the word of Jehovah again came
through Haggai the prophet, saying:
“‘Is it the time for you to dwell
in your paneled houses,
“‘while this house lies in ruins?
“‘Now this is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘“Set your heart on your ways.
“‘“You have sown much seed,
but you harvest little.
“‘“You eat, but it is not to satisfaction.
“‘“You drink, but you do not drink your fill.
“‘“You put on clothing, but no one gets warm.
“‘“The one who hires himself out
“puts his wages in a bag full of holes.”’
“This is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘Set your heart on your ways.
“‘Go up to the mountain and bring in lumber.
“‘And build the house,
“so that I may take pleasure in it
and I may be glorified,’ Jehovah says.
“‘You were expecting much
and receiving little;
“‘and when you brought it
into the house, I blew it away.
“For what reason?’
declares Jehovah of armies.
“‘Because my house is in ruins,
“‘while each of you runs around
taking care of his own house.
“‘So the heavens above you
withheld their dew,
“‘and the earth withheld its produce.
“‘And I kept calling
for a drought on the earth,
“‘on the mountains,
on the grain, on the new wine,
“‘on the oil,
on what grows from the ground,
on humans and livestock,
and on all the labor of your hands.’”
Jehovah compares the results
of the Jews’ self-centered efforts
to those of a hired worker who puts
his wages into a moth-eaten sack.
Because the Jews
are neglecting the house of Jehovah,
he holds back his blessing.
The results of the Jews’ labor are limited,
and their lives lack joy.
Evidently, some try to fill that void
by beautifying their own homes.
But material  things
cannot satisfy spiritual needs.
Can we see the warning here for us?
It’s not wrong to enjoy nice things.
But material things
cannot bring us true and lasting joy,
especially if we neglect
Jehovah’s work to obtain them.
Remember the lesson of Psalm 127:1:
“Unless Jehovah builds the house,
“it is in vain
that its builders work hard on it.”
On the other hand,
when we unselfishly ‘seek first
God’s Kingdom and his righteousness,’
he  provides what we really need
and at just the right time.
As Proverbs 10:22 tells us:
“It is the blessing of Jehovah
“that makes one rich,
and He adds no pain  with it.”
But now, will this rebuilt temple
really not attain to its former glory,
as some believe?
Through Haggai, Jehovah guarantees
that the future glory of this house
will be even greater.
Let’s continue reading at Haggai 2:3-9.
“‘Who is left among you
who saw this house in its former glory?
“‘How does it look to you now?
“‘Does it not seem
like nothing in comparison?
“But now be strong, Zerubbabel,’
declares Jehovah,
“‘and be strong,
Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest.
“And be strong, all you people of the land,’
declares Jehovah,
“‘and work.
“For I am with you,’
declares Jehovah of armies.
“‘Remember what I promised you
when you came out of Egypt,
“‘and my spirit remains among you.
“Do not be afraid.’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘Yet once more
—in a little while—
“‘and I will shake
the heavens and the earth
“‘and the sea and the dry land.
“‘And I will shake all the nations,
“‘and the precious things
of all the nations will come in;
“and I will fill this house with glory,’
says Jehovah of armies.
“‘The silver is mine,
“and the gold is mine,’
declares Jehovah of armies.
“‘The future glory of this house
will be greater than the former,’
says Jehovah of armies.”
Yes, when the Creator and Owner
of the entire universe declares his purpose,
who or what could possibly prevent
him from carrying it out?
Nothing and no one!
Jehovah’s straightforward message
is unmistakable.
Still, the returnees
need more encouragement.
Jehovah sends his angel
to another prophet, Zechariah.
Please turn to Zechariah 1:12-16,
and let’s read together
the angel’s reassuring words for Israel.
That’s Zechariah 1:12-16.
“So the angel of Jehovah said:”
“O Jehovah of armies,
“how long will you withhold your mercy
from Jerusalem and the cities of Judah,
with whom you have been
indignant these 70 years?”
“Jehovah answered the angel
who was speaking with me,
“with kind and comforting words.
Then the angel
who was speaking with me told me:”
“Call out,
‘This is what Jehovah of armies says:
“‘“I am zealous for Jerusalem
and for Zion with a great zeal.
“‘“With great indignation I am indignant
with the nations that are at ease,
“‘“because I felt indignant
to a small extent,
“‘but they added to the calamity.”
“‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says:
“‘“I will return to Jerusalem with mercy,
“‘and my own house will be built in her,”
declares Jehovah of armies,
“and a measuring line
will be stretched out over Jerusalem.”’”
To emphasize
just how protective Jehovah will be,
the angel continues,
at chapter 2, verses 7-9:
“Come, Zion!
“Make your escape, you who are dwelling
with the daughter of Babylon.
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says,
“who after being glorified has sent me
to the nations that were plundering you:
“‘Whoever touches you
touches the pupil of my eye.
“‘For now I will wave
my hand against them,
“and they will become
plunder for their own slaves.’
And you will certainly know
that Jehovah of armies has sent me.”
Would you let someone
poke his finger in your eye?
Of course not!
Neither will Jehovah
allow Israel’s opposers to harm them.
Then, in Zechariah 3:1, 2,
the angel reveals
the greater enemy behind the opposition.
“And he showed me Joshua the high priest
standing before the angel of Jehovah,
“and Satan was standing
at his right hand to resist him.
Then the angel of Jehovah said to Satan:”
“May Jehovah rebuke you, O Satan,
“yes, may Jehovah,
who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you!
Is not this one a burning log
snatched out of the fire?”
Is all this intended simply to build up
Israel’s confidence in themselves?
On the contrary!
They need to remember
that only with Jehovah’s help
can they accomplish anything.
Listen to the angel’s further words
to Zechariah in chapter 4, verses 6, 7:
“This is the word of Jehovah to Zerubbabel:
“‘Not by a military force, nor by power,
“but by my spirit,’
says Jehovah of armies.
“Who are you, O great mountain?
“Before Zerubbabel
you will become a level land.
“And he will bring out
the top stone amid shouts of:
‘How wonderful! How wonderful!’”
Energized by Jehovah’s motivating words
through his two prophets,
the Jews stop wavering
in a lack of faith and resume
construction of the temple.
Predictably, Israel’s enemy neighbors,
led by Tattenai and Shethar-bozenai,
also spring into action.
Returning to the book of Ezra,
we read at chapter 5, verses 3-5:
“At that time Tattenai the governor
of the region Beyond the River
and Shethar-bozenai and their colleagues
came to them and asked them:”
“Who issued an order to you
to build this house
and to finish this structure?”
“Then they asked them:”
“What are the names of the men
who are working on this building?”
“But God was watching
over the elders of the Jews,
“and they did not stop them
until the report could be sent to Darius
and an official document
could be sent back concerning this.”
So there is another lesson for us today:
When we courageously do
Jehovah’s work despite opposition,
Jehovah blesses our efforts
and enables us to keep on serving him.
For now, though,
the Jews must continue their work
on the temple under ban.
The king who issued  the ban, however,
was assassinated
after reigning only seven months.
So Tattenai and his accomplices
are dealing with a new  king, Darius I.
In denouncing the Jews,
they try to use
Zerubbabel’s own words against him,
including his statement that King Cyrus
issued the order to rebuild the temple.
They ask King Darius
to investigate whether that’s really so.
Darius orders the investigation.
What will King Darius decide?
Will the Jews’ renewed faith
and determination bring them joy?
or just more trouble?
Darius learns that Cyrus
did indeed order that the temple be rebuilt.
At Ezra 6:6-12, we read
Darius’ stinging reply.
“So now Tattenai the governor
of the region Beyond the River,
“Shethar-bozenai, and your colleagues,
“the lesser governors
of the region Beyond the River
“—stay away from there.
“Do not interfere with the work
on that house of God.
“The governor of the Jews
and the elders of the Jews
“will rebuild that house of God
in its former place.
“Furthermore, I am issuing an order
“as to what you are to do
for these elders of the Jews
“for rebuilding that house of God:
“From the royal treasury,
“from the tax collected
in the region Beyond the River,
“the expenses
are to be promptly given to these men
“to continue without interruption.
“And whatever is needed
“—young bulls as well as rams and lambs
“for the burnt offerings
to the God of heaven,
“wheat, salt, wine, and oil,
“just as the priests
who are in Jerusalem say—
“is to be given them continually
“day by day without fail,
“so that they
may continually present offerings
“that please the God of the heavens
“and pray for the life
of the king and his sons.
“I have also issued an order
that if anyone violates this decree,
“a timber will be pulled out of his house
“and he will be lifted up and fastened to it,
“and his house will be turned
into a public latrine for this offense.
“And may the God
who has caused his name to reside there
“overthrow any king
and people who lift a hand
“to violate this order
and destroy that house of God,
“which is in Jerusalem.
“I, Darius, issue this order.
Let it be done promptly.”
Upon receiving the king’s command,
Tattenai and his colleagues have no choice.
Not only must they stop interfering
with the work on the temple,
they must help finance it!
What a joyful outcome for the faithful Jews.
In 515 B.C.E.,
they hold the inauguration
of the house of God with joy,
and as we read at verse 22:
“They also joyfully held
“the Festival of Unleavened Bread
for seven days,
“for Jehovah caused them to rejoice
“and he had made the heart
of the king of Assyria favorable toward them,
“so that he supported them
in the work of the house of the true God,
the God of Israel.”
Today, when wise and just officials
similarly intervene in our behalf,
we’re very grateful to them.
But we’re most grateful
to Jehovah for directing matters.
As Proverbs 21:1 says:
“A king’s heart is like streams of water
“in Jehovah’s hand.
He directs it wherever He pleases.”
So we do not put
our ultimate hope in any ruler
or institution of this world.
None of them
can bring us permanent salvation.
In fact,
before the end of Satan’s system,
all the nations
will turn against Jehovah’s people.
But they’ll experience an outcome
worse than that of Tattenai’s.
What lessons can we  draw
from these portions
of Ezra, Haggai, and Zechariah?
First, Jehovah blesses our determined efforts
to keep on doing his work despite challenges,
but he frustrates
the efforts of our opposers.
Second, when we put Jehovah’s work
ahead of material comforts,
he gives us true joy.
What’s the work Jesus
commissioned us to do today?
He made it very clear
in his parting words to his followers:
“Go, therefore, and make disciples
of people of all the nations.”
Are we, with our hearts and hands,
putting this assignment
ahead of material goals?
Haggai foretold that one day,
Jehovah’s temple
would become far more glorious
than the one Solomon built.
That prophecy is being fulfilled today.
Jehovah is using our preaching
to shake the nations.
Millions of “precious things”
—new worshippers—
are coming to him.
These are joyfully flocking
to the great spiritual temple
—Jehovah’s arrangement for worshipping him
on the basis of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice.
Now is not the time to focus our attention
on “paneled houses”
or on any other unnecessary pursuit.
Very soon, on a day we do not expect,
Satan’s world will end,
and we will enter Jehovah’s new world.
So no matter how Satan tries to discourage
or distract us now,
may we never let him rob us
of our joy in Jehovah!
May we, rather, walk with Jehovah
right into his peaceful new world,
where we will serve
him forever with rejoicing.
Zerubbabel,
Jeshua,
Haggai,
and Zechariah have done much
to help Israel regain Jehovah’s favor.
Later, in 468 B.C.E.,
Ezra himself comes to Jerusalem
to support true worship.
But the nation needs still more direction.
So Jehovah sends them another brave leader.
During the next two days of this convention,
we’ll learn
about that faithful and powerful man
—Nehemiah.